LAHORE: More than 6,000 policemen have been deployed in areas of the city to ensure security and to take action over wheelie on the Independence Day.

According to the plan, the divisional superintendents of police (SPs) were tasked with preparing a list of all vulnerable points, including parks, educational institutions, restaurants and venues, for security on the Independence Day.

The important events and points will include the ceremony of change of guards at Allama Iqbal’s tomb, flag-hoisting ceremony at Town Hall and Wapda House. The police have also been given instructions to take action over eve-teasing, wheelies and rash driving. The anti-riot force would be on standby to respond in case of any law and order situation as would be Rescue 1122 and Edhi Foundation that have restricted leaves of their employees to improve their services on the occasion.

SP Security Abadit Nisar told Dawn they would utilise all the available resources to protect life and property of the citizens. He said they would not allow the miscreants to create nuisance and harass people, adding that the Dolphin Force, Police Response Unit (PRU) and Quick Response Force (QRF) would continue patrolling the city roads.

TRAFFIC POLICE: The traffic police have also devised a plan to clamp down on wheelie by deploying special teams in all circles of the city on the eve of Independence Day.

The traffic police would deploy additional force on the main roads to stop the youngsters involved in wheelie. They are continuing with the crackdown on underage driving, wheelie and rash driving launched last month. A decision has been made to take action against the mechanics involved in designing motorcycles for wheelie.

Chief Traffic Officer (CTO) Rai Ijaz Ahmad said the city traffic police official would continue patrolling their respective areas and action would be taken against the vehicles without silencers and those using pressure horns. He appealed to the parents to check and stop their children not to be involved in one wheeling because it’s dangerous and result in severe accidents.