LAHORE: Over 6,000 security personnel will be deployed for security of the Independence Cup to be played between World XI and Pakistan from tomorrow (Tuesday).

Punjab government spokesman Malik Ahmed Khan held a press conference on Sunday at 90, Shahrah-i-Quaid-i-Azam regarding the security arrangements. Minister for Sports Jahangir Khanzada, Commissioner Abdullah Sumbal, Deputy Inspector General (DIG) Operations Dr Haider Ashraf and Chief Traffic Officer (CTO) Rai Ijaz Ahmed were also present.

The spokesman said: “We have also cross-checked all arrangements and removed all loopholes which were detected while holding the Pakistan Super League final here.”

Commissioner Sumbal said they had made arrangements for facilitating cricket fans coming to watch the tournament. “We have installed lights in and around all the routes leading to Nishtar Sports Complex and special Speedo buses will provide pick and drop services to the spectators.”

He said they had established parking spots in Forman Christian College, Liberty Market, Jaam-i-Shireen Park and Sunfort Hotel and also established a sitting area for drivers. A makeshift hospital had also been built within Nishtar complex in case of an emergency, and they would also provide placards to spectators, he added.

“CCTV cameras have been installed on the route of the team and ICC officials with a four-tier VVIP security from hotel to the stadium,” shared Dr Haider Ashraf.

Rai Ijaz said they had established four parking spaces for spectators who would only be able to enter Gaddafi Stadium after passing through three security checks. He appealed to spectators to carry their identity cards and tickets with them otherwise they would not be allowed to park their vehicles or enter the Nishtar Sports Complex.

People coming from Mughalpura, The Mall, Mozang, Ichhra and Wahdat Colony would have to park their vehicles after crossing Shah Jamal underpass in the FC College, and those

coming from Kahna, Kot Lakhpat and Ferozepur Road would have to use Walton Road, Qainchi, Cavalry Grounds flyover, Firdous Market and Husain Chowk to park their vehicles at Liberty Market parking.

The spectators coming from Thokar Niaz Baig, motorway, Wapda Town, Garden Town, Johar Town and Township will use Barkat Market to FC College parking. Those coming from Gulberg and Cantt will park their vehicles at LDA parking plaza and Jaam-i-Shireen Park.

The CTO further said Canal Road would be open for traffic and those wanting to go to Kahna, Kot Lakhpat, Cantt and Mughalpura could use Walton Road. Firdous Market, Husain Chowk, M.M. Alam Road, Mini Market, Main Boulevard and Siddique Trader Centre would be open as well as Jail Road from Siddique Trade Centre to Qartaba Chowk.

He said the metro bus will be operational; only its stops in front of the Gaddafi Stadium will be closed. He advised spectators to use the bus service to reach the stadium and that they had set up points for pick up and drop. He added that vehicles fitted with CNG and LPG kits would not be allowed in the parking spaces.

