LAHORE: The army men and Rangers deployed for maintaining law and order during polling for NA-120 held here on Sunday strictly monitored the polling process in an apparent bid to quell any chances of rigging and make its results acceptable to all.

Jawans of the uniformed forces joined polling agents of various candidates by using voters list to identify the voters before letting them in to cast their ballots in each polling booth.

There were over 550 polling booths in 220 polling stations, 103 of them for male and 98 female voters while 19 were combined.

Moreover, one army man was seen deployed at each polling station counting the voter turnout – counting those coming out after using their right to franchise.

Carrying plain papers they would enumerate the voters like professional enumerators. Some of them would share their data with the interested media men.

The army had also monitored the recently held census.

Generally, the army men were strictly implementing the Election Commission’s code of conduct as no voter was allowed to carry his cell phone and handbag, in case of women, inside polling stations.

On most occasions, the media was also disallowed in the jurisdiction of polling stations notwithstanding the announcements made both by ISPR, media cell of the army, and ECP - the latter’s accreditation cards issued to journalists proved to be of no use.

There were also incidents in which cell phones of people were temporarily confiscated when they tried to take a picture of polling stations from outside the venue.

The purchee (slip) issued by any party to voters carrying election symbol or name of a party was also banned. The army men would tear down such a purchee and ask the carrier to orally remember his/her vote number. Some elderly and illiterate voters, particularly women, were however permitted to just carry the part of the purchee containing the vote number.

SECURITY: The voting process remained peaceful and continued uninterrupted throughout the day. As many as 6,000 policemen and 500 Rangers personnel were deployed for the security. The security officials also continued to patrol the constituency to keep an eye on any suspicious element.

The constituency was divided into five zones. Each zone was supervised by an officer of SP rank. Each zone was further divided into sectors and sub-sectors supervised by DSP and sub-inspector rank officers.

At least 20 police officials were deployed at every polling station. A hundred meters area around polling stations was covered with barbed wires and barricades and only voters carrying CNIC cards were allowed entry after checking at three points: frisking, metal detectors and walk-through gates.

There was no major political clash reported during the polling. The security officials had earlier declared all the polling stations sensitive. The ECP had also linked the 220 polling stations with Google Maps to facilitate the voters.

Activists of PTI and PML-N continued to chant slogans at their camps set up outside every polling station. The law-enforcement agencies personnel were issuing warnings to workers over violation of code of conduct.

However, some minor clashes were also reported including one at Mozang when PTI candidate Yasmeen Rashid came to visit the polling station and she was stopped by the PML-N workers who started chanting slogans against her. The PTI activists moved forward to respond to PML-N supporters.

Traffic was blocked on the roads around Mozang when the activists of both parties came face to face to chant slogans in favour of their candidates.

In another incident, PML-N and PTI workers also came face to face outside the Fatima Jinnah Medical University polling station where police and Rangers personnel dispersed them.

In Bilal Ganj, PML-N activists tried to enter a polling station where police stopped them and harsh words were exchanged between the activists and the police. A [police] contingent was called to disperse the PML-N workers.

Many journalists and workers of observatory bodies alleged that they were not allowed entry into polling stations.

“I visited over 50 polling stations and was not allowed to enter any of these stations despite having an ECP card,” claimed Rai Shahnawaza, reporter of a private TV channel.

Representatives of observatory bodies including Free and Fair Election Network (Fafen) were also stopped from entering the polling station.

Abdul Ahad, a senior official of Fafen, said their observers were stopped at eight polling stations; seven partially and one totally.

ECP spokesperson Huda Gohar said the media was allowed inside polling stations and the journalists carrying cameras were not allowed.

