LAHORE: Police chief Arif Nawaz has written to the chief minister that the morale of the force has adversely been affected due to cut in their salary after the withdrawal (or cut in) of risk, house and daily allowances.

Recently, the government withdrew the special risk allowance implemented in 2008 to boost the morale of the after frequent terrorist attacks in the country.

The letter by IGP Nawaz states: “(The withdrawal of the allowance) has affected morale of the employees of Punjab Police adversely, and undermined their role in the fight against crime and terrorism”.

The IGP demanded that the risk allowance be restored at old rate – 100pc of one month pay equal to initial of pay scales – and also PHP and traffic allowance equal to one extra pay, besides daily allowance equal to 20 days at the old rate as on June 30, 2017.

The letter adds many allowances like special allowance, adhoc relief, utility allowance, administrative allowance and other incentives were granted to officers of various Punjab departments except for the police.

With the revision of BPS-2017, risk allowance has been reduced to 50pc of the initial of pay scales of 2008. Similarly, the fixed DA has been kept frozen at the old level of BPS-2005. This revision has neutralised the special pay package of Punjab Police negating the true spirit of one extra basic pay.

Constable Yaseen Butt said the government had decreased risk, daily and house allowances of the police force while increased the welfare fund deduction and income tax from their monthly salaries.

He said they were not getting benefits of the 10pc recent increase in salaries after tax hike and allowance cuts. He said a constable had to suffer a Rs1,600 cut in their salary every month.

He said the government had started giving risk allowance in 2008 where a constable was given Rs3,800 per month.

Additional IG Ghazi Salahuddin told Dawn the federal government had revised pay scales of the departments but withdrew special allowances only of police force.

Sources in the provincial government said the chief minister was likely to restore the allowance.

