Police on Sunday arrested two students of the Quaid-i-Azam University (QAU) for involvement in clashes between student groups that left 35 injured a day earlier.

According to the first information report (FIR), registered by police at Secretariat Police Station and , obtained by DawnNews, the chairs of two students organisations - the Mehran Council and Baloch students body - instigated their supporters towards violence by using hate speeches.

In clashes that ensued on Saturday between members of the councils, 35 students were injured. Police had arrived at the premises of the university to control the clash, resorting to teargas shelling and baton charge to disperse the enraged students.

Rangers personnel had also arrived on the university's premises to help control the situation.

Shafqat Mangrio and Mansoor Somroo were arrested for their involvement in the clashes on Sunday.

According to the FIR, Mangrio had stood on the rooftop of the hostel and fired into the air with his pistol. The weapon has been recovered by the police.

The FIR adds that the chair of the Mehran Council, Fahad, instigated supporters who had gathered for a general body meeting and by delivering hate speeches against the Baloch students.

The members of the council proceed towards Hostel No. 8 "where Fahad was present and was instigating students by hate speeches," the FIR says.

"They [the Mehran Council] tried to siege the Baloch students who were on the ground floor [of the hostel]," the FIR adds.

Clashes broke out between members of the council and the Baloch students when the latter went up to the roof.

The FIR notes that chairs of both student organisations had "used hate speech and instigated their supporters to fight and beat each other with hockey sticks."

Local police personnel, district administration, members of the university's administration, Dr Sohail Nadeem and Dr Amanat, were present during the clashes that left property damaged, the FIR states.

Following Saturday's incident, QAU was closed for the upcoming week. Hostels in the campus are also being got vacated.

