Recently in Islamabad, the construction of narratives was an important issue taken up in some sessions of policy and intellectual debate with regards to countering violent extremism. Many experts thought that the religious extremists believe in and promote their own parallel legal/jurisprudential narratives on religious grounds; the language, idiom, and rationale of their narratives are all religious.

Interestingly, the behaviours and narratives of the power elite and establishment also came under scrutiny, which many experts found to be as unhealthy as those of non-state actors. The reason for this, they said, was due to the establishment’s lack of trust in the social contract between state and society. The Constitution of Pakistan, it seems, remains the least sacred document in the country.

Ironically, both the establishment and non-state actors are largely confronting each other outside of constitutional and democratic domains. This is perhaps why militants oppose constitutions and democracies. Moderate religious scholars may contest the issue and declare militants as being ‘ignorant’, but the fact remains that militants seek their legitimacy from religion. Importantly, the Constitution of Pakistan prohibits the raising of any sort of private army or militia under Article 256. It says that any such private organisation is illegal.

Instead of seeking power from the Constitution, democratic norms and principles of democratic accountability, the establishment tends to counter militants’ arguments and narratives with jargon such as ‘governance’ and ‘corruption’. They use these two keywords in an attempt to gain moral authority, believing that good governance and the elimination of corruption alone will defeat militancy and extremism. This, obviously, increases the burden on others. Who are these ‘others’? They are politicians, both good and bad, and those segments of the media, intelligentsia and civil society, who believe in democratic values and constitutional norms.

What develops is an interesting situation where those who believe in the supremacy of the Constitution and democratic values have little relevance in the larger national, religious and political discourses — those of the militants as well as of the establishment. Militants and their sympathisers label them as transgressors, deviants, ignorant, puppets of the West and — most importantly — ideologically corrupt creatures. Meanwhile, the establishment considers them financially and morally corrupt people.

This may be perceived as a dilemma, paradox or dichotomy — but our generation has also developed a tendency to think along similar lines.

Now let’s revisit the debate on narratives and imagine the kind of alternative narratives that we require in Pakistan. Can the Constitution provide and strengthen such narratives that may weaken the narratives of non-state actors? Alternatively, will the good governance mantra thrown around by the establishment be enough to defeat militancy in Pakistan?

The Constitution of Pakistan is a comprehensive social contract upon which most parties, espousing different thoughts, agree. Many experts believe that the Constitution has the power to eradicate negative narratives, and that this activity will help in laying the foundations for positive thinking. They argue that it is the only document on which all segments of our society — including nationalist, secular, liberal, moderate and religious forces — are in agreement, despite their divergent views and reservations on certain clauses. They can launch campaigns against such clauses. Political parties can contest elections to seek the mandate to amend such clauses. But, ultimately, this is a written, formal social contract built with consensus — and it binds forces of divergent views and values together. The Constitution and democratic system can ensure transparency and accountability.

Of course, someone else could argue that strict systems, authoritarian rule, and monarchies can also bring about some extent of social order. However, this depends on how one defines ‘good governance’. Can a sort of authoritarian discipline, different types of suppression and bans on divergent expressions be thought of as characteristics of good governance? Which would be considered a model of governance: a functional delivery system with all, or limited freedoms? Most importantly, can such paradigms remove multiple ambiguities prevailing in our society? Would it be enough to actually bring the extremists on the right path?

Those who believe the answer to be in the affirmative would then observe that the country does not need a counter-extremism policy, that it deserves applause for what it has attained in the form of a state of ‘new normalcy’. So what, they would say, if it is not up to scratch in terms of global norms, or that our society seems morbid from the outside. There are many states in the world which are surviving with even worse indicators. Why is the world worried about us? May be we have something beyond mere narratives that worries the world.

Political scientists tend to call this ‘social decay’, a situation “where people are generalised into a generic group called ‘strangers’ and the only time strangers interact with each other is when one stranger offers another stranger a service or something that the other stranger needs or wants”. Doesn’t this definition hold a mirror up to our society? Religiosity versus secularism, right wing versus liberal, pro-democracy versus pro-establishment, and other such debates can all be seen in this context.

In psychological terms, such conditions may cause depressive disorders that can compromise one’s sanity. As far as other impacts are concerned, a recent article published in Dawn revealed that Pakistan ranked 113th in the Social Progress Index (SPI) for 2016 — behind India and Bangladesh, which ranked 98th and 101st, respectively.

The writer also mentioned that Pakistan has practically the worst ranking for tolerance and inclusion — coming in second last place, 132nd out of 133 countries. In 2014, Pakistan was one of the most unpopular countries in the world according to the Good Country Index, coming in 111th place out of 163 countries; far from perfect in methodology that index mapping has stopped in subsequent years.

Let’s also have a look at the internal strength of our state and society, which appear without bulwarks and unable to pull the country out of its listing as one of the most fragile states in the current global scenario. Pakistan is ranked as the 14th most fragile state in 2016. Its position marginally improved — mainly because of worsening conditions in Syria and Yemen — which pushed Pakistan from 12th to 14th position.

The Fund for Peace, the organisation which issues the ranking of fragile states, uses six indicators to determine the status of fragile states: demographic pressures, group grievances, refugees and internally displaced people, human flight and brain drain, uneven economic development, and poverty and economic decline. It can be claimed that Pakistan is making headway in some areas, which may provide some cause for optimism.

All these factors have a cause and effect relationship with one another and form a vicious cycle. Even if one or two indicators show some progress it wouldn’t make much difference; other factors could ruin these gains. For instance, ‘group grievances’ includes all forms of violence — including violence on religious, sectarian and other minorities.

Statistically, Pakistan’s internal security situation has improved in the last few years, with a comparative decrease in the number of violent incidents. But discrimination and extremism on a societal level show no signs of abating. Sometimes, a vicious cycle that becomes so hard to break needs concerted and consolidated efforts, both from the state and society.

The Fragile States Index shows that two factors are important for states to improve their image: first, internal stability, followed by good relationships with neighbouring states. Internal stability does not come through eliminating incidents of crime and terrorism alone but by curtailing their root causes. These root causes are not only entrenched in state policies but are also deeply embedded in Pakistani society’s behaviour. The common person is under the impression that their extremist views are not abnormal, and the state also does not recognise this problem; both have developed a milieu where narcissism is a primary value.

Second, the nature of relationships with neighbours determines the economic potential, and the political and strategic stability of the state. Apparently, it seems paradoxical that Pakistan does not enjoy good relations with its three immediate neighbours — with whom it shares common civilisations and histories, and religious, cultural and social values. With China, however, Pakistan has evolved common economic and strategic interests, despite diverse cultures.

This contrasting nature of relationships with neighbouring states is not only a political or strategic question, it also reveals the quest of a nation attempting to establish an independent identity within other nations that share common characteristics. In this struggle, it is borrowing cultural influences out of its regional domains. Pakistan cannot become ‘Al-Bakistan’, but in this quest for an ‘image’ both state and society are falling deeper into delusions — goodness knows what we will find there.

