LAHORE: The Federal Government Inspector of Railways (FGIR) had time and again expressed reservations about the ‘inadequate’ computer-based Interlocking Signalling System installed on Lodhran and Shahdara sections, where Awam Express smashed into a goods train on Sept 15.

The FGIR had warned the Pakistan Railways (PR) authorities not to make operational the new signalling system without installing automatic train protection gadgets in the locomotives hauling passenger trains on the route, an officer of the Ministry of Railways told Dawn On Sunday.

“The FGIR is the safety controlling authority in the PR. No train can be operated on a route if after inspection the FGIR finds that the railway (track, allied facilities and rolling stock) do not fulfill requirements essential for the public carriage of passengers,” said the officer while quoting from the Railways Act 1890.

Section 18 of the Act reads: “A railway shall not be opened for the public carriage of passengers until the federal government or an inspector empowered by the central government in this behalf, has by order sanctioned the opening thereof for that purpose.”

Section 19 (2) reads: “If in the opinion of the inspector the railway cannot be so open without danger to the public, if he shall state that opinion, together with the grounds therefore, to the central government and the federal government may thereupon order the railway administration to postpone the opening of the railway.”

The PR had in February 2010 entered into an agreement with a consortium of German firm Bombardier Transportation and China Railway Signal and Communication in order to make rail journey safer and faster on its Lodhran-Shahdara section.

Under the agreement, latest computer-based interlocking signal and auto-block systems were to be installed on some 31 stations in addition to installation of automatic train protection system in locomotives dedicated to operate trains on the Lodhran-Shahdara sections.

“Work on the project was to begin on May 10, 2010, and completed by May 9, 2013, at the estimated cost of Rs10.720 billion according to the PC-1,” said the officer while seeking anonymity.

Since the consortium could not even start work on the project within the stipulated time-frame, the deadline was extended to June 30, 2016.

Again, inordinate delay in completion of the project not only necessitated revision in its cost to Rs17.4 billion but also the deadline to May 10, 2017.

In the meanwhile, the PR paid Rs12.5 billion to the consortium, including 100 per cent advance payment of Rs1.5 billion on account of Automatic Train Protection System.

So far, the consortium has installed and made operational computer-based interlocking signal and auto-block system on seven railway stations between Lodhran and Riazabad. However, the Automatic Train Protection System has yet to be installed in locomotives for non-provision of equipment and software by the consortium.

“Can installation of the system on 24 stations be completed in less than a year (of the deadline) when the consortium took six years to upgrade seven stations?” said the officer.

