PESHAWAR: In the face of stiff opposition by one of the key allies of the ruling Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz (PML-N), the federal cabinet in its exclusive meeting on Thursday is likely to approve mainstreaming of Fata instead of its merger with Khyber Pakhtunkhwa as recommended by the reforms committee.

Official sources said the cabinet would discuss “mainstreaming” of the Federally Administered Tribal Areas and approve a set of reforms recommended by the six-member committee headed by Adviser on Foreign Affairs Sartaj Aziz.

The Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam (JUI-F) is a staunch opponent of the merger plan.

The sources said the contentious portion of the committee’s report recommending merger of Fata with KP was likely to be removed and the word “mainstreaming of the area” would be incorporated.

Mr Aziz would brief Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and cabinet members on the reforms report. The document was made public on Aug 8 last year and is still awaiting approval of the cabinet.

“The cabinet may drop merger of the tribal region with the province as well as representation of tribal people in the KP Assembly in the next general elections,” one source said, adding that mainstreaming was a very vague term and would fizzle out the spirit of the entire reforms plan.

The committee report had been removed from the cabinet agenda in its Feb 7 meeting at the eleventh hour. The decision drew strong criticism and caused unrest among supporters of the merger plan.

Major political parties and Fata parliamentarians announced holding a rally outside the Parliament House in Islamabad on March 12 in protest against the delay in the approval of the committee report.

The Jamaat-i-Islami had staged a sit-in outside the Governor’s House in Peshawar on Feb 26. The protest was called off after Governor Iqbal Zafar Jhagra had assured that cabinet would approve the committee report before March 12.

Besides Jamaat, other parties, including the Awami National Party, Qaumi Watan Party, Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf and Pakistan Peoples Party, also demand immediate merger of Fata with the province, abolition of the Frontier Crimes Regulation (FCR) and representation of tribal people in the KP Assembly.

The JUI-F and the Pakhtunkhwa Milli Awami Party, another ally of the PML-N in the Centre, have been opposing major parts of the committee report, including merger of Fata with KP.

JUI-F chief Maulana Fazlur Rehman recently claimed that he had reached an understanding with Prime Minister Sharif on Fata reforms. According to him, the word merger would be replaced with the mainstreaming of Fata. The process for mainstreaming would start after five years.

“In the meantime, the government will carry out massive reconstruction and rehabilitation in the tribal region,” the Maulana had told journalists in Peshawar.

His contention is that the Sartaj Aziz-led committee has violated its mandate as its task was to prepare recommendations for political mainstreaming of Fata, and not to suggest its merger. He also opposes representation of tribal people in the KP Assembly in the next general elections.