PESHAWAR: The Pakistan Bureau of Statistics (PBS) will conduct the verification of census data in Kohistan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa after receiving astonishingly high figure of population of the mountainous region.

Official sources told Dawn that the provisional figures of the 2017 population census showed that Kohistan had a population of 2.6 million against that of 472,570 reported in the 1998 census and thus, making it the second most populated district of KP after Peshawar.

According to the unofficial report, the estimated population of Peshawar will be around 4.5 million against 2,019,118 in the 1998 census report. The population growth rate was 3.56 per cent, while Kohistan had 0.9 per cent in the 1998 census report.

“This is unbelievable. The provisional figures seem to be highly exaggerated,” an official said.

He said it had been decided to verify Kohistan’s census figures and that the same exercise was being conducted in Turbat district of Balochistan.

“Turbat has the same case. The PBS will start verification process there, too,” he said.

The sources said the PBS recently ordered the verification of census data in Kohistan and the process was likely to begin in the next few days.

They said the bureau had formed teams to visit the area for the purpose.

The sources said the teams would proceed to Kohistan after getting security clearance from the quarters concerned.

“Our staff members are waiting for security clearance,” said an official.

He said enumerators would verify computerised national identity cards to check population figures appeared in the census report.

The countrywide population census began on April 15 and ended on May 25. Around 200,000 troops were engaged for the exercise.

Only few pockets were not covered in Fata due to the delicate security situation. The process was conducted in two phases.

The officials said the coding and editing of census data, both head count and houses, had almost been completed, while the report would be put up to the Council of Common Interest for approval.

The KP government recently divided Kohistan into upper, lower and central Kohistan districts. With 7,492 square kilometers area, Kohistan is considered to be among the most underdeveloped districts of KP.

The social indicators of the area are very poor. The literacy rate was just 11.1 per cent there according to the 1988 census report.

Polygamy is very common among Kohistanis, who are conservative by and large.

The local population was 465,237 in 1981 census report and 472,570 in the 1998 census figures showing slight increase in the density of the population.

The officials said Kohistan’s population data remained controversial in the past as the people gave wrong information about the size of their families.

“The bureau had to verify population census figures in 1981 and 1998, too,” said another official dealing with the matter.

He said Kohistan had tribal society and that tribes had disputes.

“They (Kohistanis) intentionally gave enumerators false figures to dominate the rival tribes, particularly in Palas and Pattan tehsils. We suspect that a single family has been shown at three different places and thus, producing highly exaggerated population figures,” he said.

The officials said the provision of false information to census staff was a crime and the relevant law suggested penalties.

Section 13(3) of the Census Ordinance, 1959, states, “If any person intentionally gives false answers to, or refuse to answer to the best of his knowledge or belief, the questionnaire or other relevant question asked of him by a census officer which he is legally bound to answer, he shall be punishable with (imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or) with fine which may extend to Rs15,000 (or with both).”

