WHEN happenings in the world around you, the Trumps, the violence, the mindless mass murder justified in the name of faith or other spurious reasons, continue to fill you with doom and gloom what can dramatically lift that depression?

Nothing works the magic like the sight of dozens of young men and women, with beaming faces, confident gaits, a demeanour full of promise and aspirations, and clearly exhibiting a determination to shape a more beautiful and fairer world — for tomorrow belongs to them.

Of course, if you happen to be a parent, witnessing the apple of your eye graduating, it is an emotional experience and marks the passing of the baton from one generation to the next. And the added knowledge that the hands shaping the world in a small, humble way will be much safer than your own is comforting, uplifting to say the least.

Following the Brexit campaign and vote in the UK, where a spike in race-related incidents was evidenced and the situation was further worsened when innocent civilians were killed in murderous attacks that Muslim extremists claimed responsibility for, what we experienced last Thursday was pleasing as well as reassuring.

The graduating students represented such a beautiful and diverse mix of different ethnic and racial origins, faiths and nationalities. As my daughter, herself in a flowing graduation robe, pointed out young women outnumbered their male counterparts by some margin.
Despite campaigns by xenophobic groups and parties to stir up racial discord, what one witnessed on this day could only be described as a humiliating rebuttal to them. The reality of our children’s world is so, so inclusive.

The ceremony over when everyone spilled out of the hall onto the terraces on the sides for the reception and the proud young women and men mingled, there seemed no barrier between them. They made a rather complete, yet diverse, whole. They were a family. One for all, all for one.

A day earlier, that is on Wednesday evening, we were driving for dinner in Central London and happened to take Park Lane. Having been sent down that route by the Satnav, it was inevitable that I pointed out Avenfield House to all in the car when we went past it.

A Uruguayan friend, who has been a London resident for long and works for a news organisation, didn’t take long to understand the significance of the building being mentioned, as it is the source of considerable upheaval in Pakistan.

As I write these lines, the Supreme Court of Pakistan has reserved judgement in the Panama Papers case and the prime minister’s fate seems to be hanging in the balance. While many await the verdict, none would be waiting with the anxiety of Nawaz Sharif.

His anxiety would be manifold as he is not only facing a possible disqualification, it is also not apparent if his children are in the clear because, at least during the hearing, the court expressed unhappiness about the health of some of the documents submitted by the defence.

Many commentators have said if the prime minister’s sons face censure by the court, it may not be the worst outcome for him if he is left in office, even with a NAB reference hanging over him. But if he is disqualified and/or his daughter is then his plan to have her as the heir apparent is also put into jeopardy.

From my point of reference, the entire current political leadership of the country has been on a journey and participated in the transition from outright autocratic rule to power-sharing with the military.

No matter how imperfect, a system is evolving where institutions such as the judiciary and parliament are increasingly assertive and mindful of their rights and responsibilities, and this can only improve further with time.

There are many voices asking why only politicians are held to account every now and then and why members of the more powerful state institutions are seemingly immune from any such exercise.

It is an argument that does carry weight. But there is a counter-argument too: the transition from military rule to power-sharing of the sort currently in place in the country has not been the result of a revolution. It has been a slow evolution where the military has understood that it is not viable for it to rule in defiance of the law and Constitution now. That is what has convinced it to step back. Popular mandate is one factor but the politicians need also be mindful that there are no skeletons in their cupboard that make them vulnerable to outside pressures and manipulation.

Equally, it is incumbent on all civilian politicians, regardless of their origins, never to allow themselves to be tools in the hands of other institutions. This may enable them to gain in the short term but can only be likened to collective suicide on a broader canvas. I could quote many examples from our contemporary history.

The current crop of leaders, and there appear to be no exceptions, are all at a stage in life that no matter how glorious an innings they have played for the restoration and consolidation of civilian rule and supremacy in the country, soon must consider passing the baton to the next generation.

Just look at the percentage of our population under 30 and the wonderful things that generation is capable of whether it is excelling in education, science or business and industry. Anyone fortunate enough to have had an opportunity has rarely let us down.

Let our generation’s parting gift to the next be a more level playing field, of as much equal opportunity as possible, and then sit back and see what wonders it is capable of. I am not being naïve; menaces such as extremism and intolerance must be defeated. But even then.