KHAR: The local health department on Wednesday announced the launch of anti-measles campaign in Bajaur Agency today (Thursday) after a long break.

“The last mass measles immunisation campaign was carried out in 2007 but it was not effective due to poor law and order situation in the region,” agency surgeon Dr Zakir Hussain told reporters at the Agency Headquarters Hospital here.

Dr Zakir said the 12 days anti-measles campaign was meant to vaccinate 422,000 children aged between six month and 10 years against lethal disease across Bajaur Agency.

He said 1,259 health workers, including 178 health technicians, would take part in the campaign.

Last campaign was carried out in the agency in 2007
The agency surgeon said vaccinators had undergone special training workshops.

“We have tried our best to engage those workers, who are competent and expert, because the measles injections are very sensitive compared to others,” he said.

Dr Zakir said each immunisation team would consist of five people and that one would be technician and the others would be facilitators.

He said the style of anti-measles campaign was different from anti-polio one as instead of going from door to door, workers would vaccinate children in schools, health centres and guesthouses. The agency surgeon said the health department had finalised arrangements for the campaign in collaboration with local administration.

“We have completed our homework. All available resources will be used for the campaign of the campaign,” he said.

Dr Zakir said people from all walks of life had assured the department of full support and cooperation for the anti-measles campaign.

He said the health department had conducted a series of consultative meetings with tribal elders, ulema, khateebs, prayers leaders and heads of relevant departments and doctors to take them into confidence about the campaign.

The agency surgeon said though the law and order situation was favourable for the campaign, the administration and security forces had made extraordinary arrangements for the security of vaccinators.

On the occasion, health officials highlighted the causes of measles and the need for its prevention and control.

They said measles claimed scores of lives in Bajaur every year and they hoped that the campaign would help contain its high incidence.