KHAR: The local administration on Friday ordered inquiry into non-disbursement of the June salary by some private banks to scores of government employees in Bajaur Agency before Eid. A committee consisting of the administration officials will look into the matter.

It is likely to start work on Monday when the bank will reopen after the extended Eid holidays.

Some private banks in the agency had stopped ‘public dealing’ several hours before their routine closure last Monday over faulty computer systems and unavailability of cash.

Officials in the know told Dawn that the committee would check the bank records, examine their computer systems and speak to the relevant staff members.

They said they didn’t know the exact number of government employees, who were denied salary before Eid, but believed the number ran into hundreds.

The officials said if the bank staff members were found at fault, strict action would be taken against them.

The government employees insisted the bank staff members ‘intentionally’ stopped disbursing the June salary to them after some of them protested their misbehaviour.

Some however asserted the banks didn’t give them money either for running out of cash or for suffering a technical fault in computer system.

HUGE FUNDS PROVIDED: Bajaur Agency MNA Haji Bismillah Khan on Friday claimed a huge sum of money had been allocated for the development of backward and less developed areas in Bajaur Agency in the annual development programme for financial year 2016-17.

“A priority has been given to the development of Bajaur’s backward areas in the current Fata development programme in order to improve the living standard of the local residents by provision of basic and modern facilities,” he told a delegation of elders and religious leaders of various areas of agency, who called on him at his residence in Nawagai area here.

The MNA said a number of development schemes had been approved for Bajaur’s backward areas, which would turn out to be a game-changer for the entire region.

“These schemes will not only ensure provision of basic and modern civic facilities to the people but will improve the socio-economic condition of the region as well,” he said.Former KP governor Engineer Shaukatullah Khan was also present in the meeting.