KHAR: A complete shutter down strike was observed in Bajaur tribal agency on Sunday against the closure of Inayat Kallay Bazaar for the last 19 days.

The bazaar was closed by the local administration after the killing of a security man on March 1.

The call for the strike was given by All Bajaur Traders Association that was supported by trader unions across the agency and All Bajaur Political Parties Alliance as well.

The bazaars and shopping centres in Khar, Nawagai, Sadiqabad, Qazafi, Raggan, Yousafabad, Umary, Pashat and Laghari remained closed owing to the strike.

During visits to different markets, it was observed that all types of shops besides hotels, restaurants and even medicines stores were closed in all bazaars across the tribal agency.

Residents of some areas complain about shortage of essential items
However, roads were open to vehicular traffic during the strike despite the fact that traders had announced on Saturday that complete wheel-jam strike would be also observed in the region. The number of public transport vehicles on roads was less as compared to routine owing to the strike.

Local people said that they faced big problems and troubles throughout the day owing to the shutter down strike of traders and shortage of public transport vehicles.

“I visited medicines market in Khar to buy some essential medicines but I was unable to do so as all the shops were closed due to the strike,” said Fazal Hakim Khan, a resident of Sadiqad.

Some people also complained about the shortage of different types of food items in their homes and said that they were not aware of the strike. “We went to Khar Bazaar to buy flour and some others things but we were upset to see that all the shops were closed owing to the strike,” they said.

The local people also criticised the trader organisations for not informing them before going on strike. It was essential for trader organisations to inform the local people about the strike a day before, they added.

According to the reports reaching from various areas, the routine life in the entire agency was paralysed by the strike.

The traders also staged several demonstrations in various bazaars on Sunday. The shopkeepers, traders and workers of various political and religious parties participated in the demonstrations.

The trader leaders on the occasion threatened to keep closed all bazaars in the agency for unidentified period if the administration did not reopen Inayat Kallay Bazaar on Monday.