KHAR: Unidentified persons kidnapped the son of former MNA and Pakistan People’s Party leader Syed Akhunzada Chattan in Bajaur Agency on Monday morning.

Officials and family members told Dawn that 11-year-old Hussain Shah, son of the former MNA, along with his younger brother was waiting for school bus outside his residence when unidentified masked men whisked him away in a car.

According to family members, Hussain Shah is a student of sixth grade in Governor Model School, Khar.

Local residents said that Levies personnel, who were assigned the duty to provide security to former MNA’s family, opened firing on the kidnappers but they managed to escape.

Later, senior officials of the political administration along with personnel of Levies Force rushed to the site of the incident and cordoned off the area. A search operation was launched in different parts of the agency to net the kidnapers.

An official of the local administration told Dawn that they had stepped up efforts for safe recovery of the boy. “All possible resources are being used for this purpose,” he said.

The official said that they were very concerned over the kidnapping of the son of former MNA and extraordinary efforts were underway for the early and safe recovery of the child.

To a question, he said that no one claimed responsibility for the kidnapping so far. However, he said that the administration started investigation into the matter and the situation would be cleared soon.

“We are investigating the matter from each angle to find out the motives behind kidnapping of the MNA’s son,” said the official. He said that fool proof security had been provided to Syed Akhunzada Chattan and his family members.

Extraordinary security measures had been made for security of the MNA and his family members, he said, adding at least 20 Levies personnel were deployed for his security.

Former MNA Syed Akhunzada Chattan, who is living in Islamabad, arrived here after the incident. He told journalists that he had been receiving threats from militants group for the last several years.

Mr Chattan said that militants would be responsible for kidnapping of his son as he had no personnel enmity with anyone. He said that kidnappers were yet to make any contact with him or his relatives.

The former MNA said that he was satisfied with the security measures taken by the administration.

Meanwhile, former president Asif Zardari has expressed grave concern over the kidnapping of the son of former MNA and PPP president for Fata Akhunzada Chattan.

In a press release issued in Islamabad, the former president called for early and safe recovery of the boy. He said he was gravely concerned about the safety of the boy. He demanded of the Bajaur Agency administration to recover him and bring the culprits to book.