KHAR: The local tribesmen have complained against hike in prices of sacrificial animals, saying there is no official check on the traders to keep the rates of cattle under control ahead of Eidul Azha.

They said that although the political administration had banned transportation of livestock from the agency to keep the prices of sacrificial animals under control, yet the practice continued unabated.

During visits to a number of cattle market in Khar tehisl of Bajaur Agency, this scribe was told by local people that prices of sacrificial animals had increased as compared to the last year.

“Smuggling of cattle from the agency and lack of official check are the main reasons of the current hike in the rates of sacrificial animals,” said Shahzada Khan.

He said that they were not expecting such a hike in the prices of animals.

Haji Khan Gul, a resident of Khar, said that prices of cattle were increased by about up to 40 per cent as compared to last year. The recent increase in the prices of cattle caused financial problems for the poor tribesmen, he added.

“I have been at the cattle market for the last three hours to buy an animal. I have disappointed to note that vendors have increased the prices of cattle by30 to 40 per cent. It forces middle class people to avoid buying sacrificial animals,” he added.

The local people accused the dealers of artificial hike in the prices of sacrificial animals. The traders were demanding exorbitant rates for small cattle, especially goats and ram, they added.

Akbar Jan, a resident of Sadiqabad, said that a number of people preferred to buy sacrificial animals in their villages instead of visiting cattle markets. “I have come to the market just to check the prices. I have noted that rates in the market are very high. I would like to buy an animal in my village,” he added.

The people also criticised the local administration for not taking steps to control the current hike in prices of cattle. It was the responsibility of the administration to check prices of cattle in the agency but it seemed that it was acting like a silent spectator, they said.

They urged the administration to take notice of the hike in prices of sacrificial animals and ban transportation of animals from the agency till Edul Azha.

Cattle traders also complained against increase in the market fee and others charges by the local contractors and the administration.

Ahmed Khan, a cattle trader in Sadiqabad market, said that increase in different charges affected his business. He said that he brought a number of animals to the market but he did not see enough number of buyers.

However, the dealers expressed the hopes that their business would get momentum in the next two days as most of the people preferred to buy animals just two or three days before the Eid.