KHAR: Medical superintendent of the agency headquarters hospital in Khar, Dr Khan Saeed, said on Saturday that six people affected by dengue fever had been admitted to the hospital during past two days.

Asked for details, he told this scribe that four patients were brought to the hospital on Friday and two on Thursday.

Dr Saeed said that all the patients belonged to Salarzai and Alazai areas, adding that they had been affected outside the agency. He said that the patients had been affected by dengue fever in Karachi and Islamabad where they were living owing to their jobs.

Khar hospital MS says patients being kept in isolation ward
The official said that all the patients had returned to their hometowns a few days ago. He said that the patients had been kept in the isolation ward, which was established at the hospital recently.

Answering a question, Dr Saeed said that condition of all the patients was out of danger, but they would stay in the hospital until they recovered from the infection.

Another official of the local health department said on condition of anonymity that the number of dengue-affected patients could increase.

Meanwhile, the residents of the agency complained that the health department had not taken measures to control spread of malaria in the region. Talking to this scribe, people of different areas said that they did not see any anti-mosquito spray and measures to control malaria in their areas since May 2015.

ANTI-INDIA RALLY: The people of Bajaur Agency’s Mamond tribe on Saturday vowed to fully support the security forces in case of any foreign aggression.

They made the announcement during an anti-India rally held in Inayat Kalley.

The demonstration was organised by Pakistan Tehreek-i-Insaf’s local chapter and participated by political activists, members of peace committees and traders.

Holding national flag and banners inscribed with slogans in favour of Pakistan Army and against India, the participants marched through different areas of Mamond tehsil. The protesters chanted slogans against the Indian government and its prime minister for issuing threatening statements against Pakistan.

PTI local leaders Gul Zafar Baghi and Usman Mamondzai spoke on the occasion.