KHAR: People from different walks of life in Bajaur Agency have expressed the hope that Fata Reforms Committee will recommend reforms in tribal areas according to the aspirations of the local people.

They also showed satisfaction over starting of consultation meetings by the five-member committee with the tribal people. The local leaders of various political and religious parties and representatives of several trade union told journalists here on Sunday that they were confident that the committee would fulfil the task with honesty and sincerity.

Gul Afzal Khan, the president of All Bajaur Political Parties Alliance, said that representatives of political and religious parties shared their views with the members of the committee about the century-old colonial system in tribal areas during the recent consultative meeting.

He said that not only workers of political and religious parties but people from all walks of life, except few tribal elders, wanted complete abolition of FCR.

Appreciate committee for holding consultative meetings with tribesmen
Aurangzeb, a local leader of PPP, said that replacing the old system in the tribal areas with civil law was need of the hour. He thanked the federal government for forming committee on reforms in the tribal areas and said that he was optimistic that the committee would do its job according to the wishes of majority of tribal people.

The PPP leader said that it was a good opportunity for the PML-N government to improve its reputation in the tribal areas by introducing reforms there.

Jamaat-i-Islami local leader Qari Abdul Majeed said that although his party had no expectations from the federal government yet he was expecting positive reforms in Fata as the committee had started its work.

He said that all political parties in the agency were united about complete abolition of FCR and extension of regular laws to the tribal areas. “We welcome setting up of Fata Reforms Committee by the federal government but we will never leave our stand regarding complete abolition of FCR,” he added.

Haji Sher Bahadur, the representative of local traders, said that FCR was the main hurdle in the way of promotion of business and economic activities in the tribal areas.

He said that traders in the tribal areas were suffering owing to FCR as illegal taxes were imposed on transportation of all kinds of commodities to the tribal agency. “The traders are against FCR and want to replace the current system with civil laws as the current system has caused numerous problems and difficulties for the people associated with trade and business in the tribal areas,” said Mr Bahadur. The leaders of political parties rejected the perception of the tribal elders that local traditions, customs and jirga system in the region would be affected after the abolition of FCR. The traditions, customs and jirga system, they said, would become more affective in tribal areas after abolition of FCR.

They vowed to continue their efforts for bringing reforms in the tribal areas. They also threatened to launch a protest movement if the committee failed to make recommendations for bringing reforms in Fata according to the wishes of majority of tribal people.