ON May 22, a suspect was killed in police custody in Kasur, a day after he was arrested.

The police didn’t kill him, the official version said. He was hit by bullets fired by one of his own. Out of a desire for speedy justice and keeping things simple, the ‘killer’ is often called the ‘accomplice’.

The police said that Riffat alias Baba had killed a journalist and injured two others near Khudian town on May 17. Apparently, a quick investigation revealed that Riffat was wanted in at least 18 cases both in Kasur and Lahore.

The accomplices are such a permanent part of the summary justice system that the guilty are left with no chance of escape.

As the story goes, Khudian police had accompanied Baba to a village to recover some arms that he said were hidden there. The group was attacked on its way back. There were three of them, armed, ready and capable. They managed to free Riffat Baba who was agile enough to snatch one SMG rifle from the police. This was a serious situation and merited a call for reinforcements from nearby police stations. A chase followed and the suspects opened fire on being intercepted.

The account concludes that later the police surveyed the agricultural field from where the suspects had been shooting. There lay Riffat Baba, shot dead by his accomplices who had escaped. A murder case was registered against these unnamed accomplices.

About the same time in Kasowal, near Sahiwal, two suspected dacoits were killed. It was officially admitted that the police bumped off the two men. However, some details were similar to the Kasur story. For instance, it was again conceded that some attackers had not only managed to free the suspects from police custody, they had also managed to snatch weapons from the policemen. This was an obvious justification for the encounter.

There were other similarities that brought out just how original — or otherwise — the official muqabla or encounter story was ... “Mazhar and Amjad Ali were wanted … in several criminal cases ... [The] assistant sub-inspector (ASI) was taking Mazhar and Ali to prison from the district court after the court granted their remand. When they reached near village 15/12-L, the police van was attacked by four unidentified men. … the attackers snatched weapons from the mobile team, had the arrested suspects released and made off towards Block No 11 jungle where they hid themselves”.

The second part of the version said that the ASI “informed the Chichawatni circle police, and three police vans reached the scene and surrounded the jungle. The suspects fired [at] the police [who] retaliated. After the crossfire ended, two suspects were found dead while the remaining managed to escape … Police claimed both were nominated in a first information report under sections 397 and 392 of the PPC”.

The following Sunday, May 28, near Safdarabad in the vicinity of Sheikhupura, three men who had allegedly murdered a seven-year-old boy after raping him were killed in firing by their ‘accomplices’.

The official explanation said the police were taking the suspects to the crime scene when they came under fire from three or four gunmen seeking to free them. Later that day, a gunman with Rs1.5 million bounty on his head was shot dead by ‘accomplices’, according to the police, in a gunfight with the law enforcers near Thatta Baig on the Okara-Faisalabad road. The story this time said the police were alerted that some gunmen were looting passersby near Thatta Baig.

“The Gogera police arrived ... [a] gunfight ensued. When the smoke cleared, one of the gunmen was found injured.” He died on the way to hospital. The deceased, Munir, was wanted in a number of cases.

The accomplice then let the police work in peace for a few days, or so it appears. But he did return with the same deadly intent.

The police don’t quite mind being embarrassed by the character so long as he’s there to play the fabled executioner, absolving these law enforcers of charges of murder. So much so that the police allow the able accomplice to routinely and very easily snatch weapons and suspects from custody.

The story continues to unfold in changing locales. On Tuesday, June 13, it was the turn of the Hasilpur Saddar police to claim that a suspect had been killed in the firing by his accomplices. Conveniently, he was introduced as a member of some gang and wanted in 20 crimes of a ‘heinous’ nature.

Again, on June 25, the police in Okara “found two unidentified men lying dead with their guns lying beside them”. There had been an encounter. A suspect was being shifted to a hospital. There were some other details but by now surely the readers won’t need any accomplices to see them through these most basic lessons in the most obvious rule book used by the police.

They are such a permanent part of the summary justice system that leaves the ‘guilty’ with no escape — other than relief from the bad world of crime provided by a friend or an accomplice. The trend seems irreversible given its said popularity amongst folks in whose name quick justice is invented. The image is recurring with ever minor changes in the account: … “A robber was allegedly killed in firing by … accomplices near Dongian village on Narowal-Pasrur road on Tuesday night.

“According to police, three robbers were looting people ... They tried to stop Shakil and Nazakat Ali of Mal Bajwa village who were riding a motorcycle. The bikers sensing the situation sped away. The robbers opened fire on them which hit one of their own accomplices, who died on the spot…”

“A wanted criminal was shot dead by his accomplices … the fleeing dacoits started shooting [at] the chasing police party which retaliated [in] self-defence … The police in the searchlight found a man lying dead … the victim was identified as the dacoit who was involved in a murder-cum-dacoity some two weeks back….”

Case closed. Accomplice does it nicely for the police.