In compliance with the Lahore High Court's (LHC) orders, the federal government on Monday appointed retired Captain Arif Nawaz Khan as Punjab's Inspector General of Police (IGP). The appointment was announced a day before the court's July 26 deadline for the matter to be decided.

A notification dated July 25, signed by Muhammad Hamza Shafqaat, deputy secretary to the Government of Pakistan, stated "Capt (retd) Arif Nawaz Khan, a BS-21 officer of Police Service of Pakistan, presently serving under the Government of Punjab, is transferred and posted as PPO, Punjab, in his own pay and scale, with immediate effect and until further orders."

On July 18, the LHC had discarded the appointment of the acting IGP, retired Capt Mohammad Usman Khattak, as the permanent Provincial Police Officer (PPO). PPO is another title for IGP Punjab.

The court had issued the order while hearing a case pertaining to the enforcement of a number of provisions of the Police Order, 2002 and challenging the appointment of Khattak as the acting IGP of Punjab.

Khattak had been made acting IGP on April 12 after the retirement of Mushtaq Ahmed Sukhera. He was made permanent on July 17 to meet a deadline issued by the LHC.

During a hearing of the case, the petitioner, through his counsel, had argued that the transfer and posting of Khattak as PPO was in violation of the Police Order, 2002.

He referred to Sections 11 and 12 of the Police Order, 2002 as well as prior orders of the court, arguing that the IGP could be appointed by the provincial government out of a panel of three police officers recommended by the federal government.

The petitioner's lawyer had also argued that the tenure of the IGP is three years, but Khattak would retire in almost three months and could not complete the tenure prescribed in the law.

The court, on reviewing the arguments, had subsequently dissolved Khattak's appointment.

It had ordered the federal and provincial governments to appoint the PPO strictly in terms of Section 11 of the Police Order, 2002 — which deals with the procedure of appointing a PPO — and Section 12 — which deals with the tenure of an incumbent IGP — before the next hearing on July 26.

Before his appointment, Khan was serving the Punjab government in the capacity of Additional IGP. He was among five officers who were being considered favourites for the post.

According to police sources, Khan enjoyed close ties with the last regular IGP, Mushtaq Ahmed Sukhera. Khan had actively launched IT-based initiatives under Sukhera and played a role in ushering reforms in the police, including the introduction of training by the army.

Khan also served the PSP in the capacity of additional IGP Balochistan; commandant Balochistan Constabulary; assistant superintendent of police Multan, Lodhran, Pakpattan and Ferozwala; SP City Gujranwala, SP Rajanpur, SSP Chakwal, SSP Dera Ismail Khan and DPO Bahawalpur.

He also served in the Special Branch in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa; the Special Branch and CID in Punjab; DIG Administration in Faisalabad and DIG Training Punjab; DIG Headquarters Balochistan; and Regional Police Officer, Quetta.

Born on August 28, 1961, Khan attended a senior management course in Turkey, the Advance Management Course-90 at NIPA Lahore (2006), and the 95th NMC in Lahore (2011/12).

583
