An explosion in Lahore's western suburbs on Monday evening resulted in injuries to more than 26 people, DawnNews reported.

DIG Operations Dr Haider Ashraf, while talking to Dawn, confirmed that the explosion happened in a fruit laden truck which was parked in a lot on Out Fall Road in Islampura area.

The police official said explosives hidden in the truck were accidentally triggered around 9pm, causing damage to scores of vehicles parked in the area and injuring passersby.

The roof of a nearby house also collapsed from the intensity of the explosion, while the windowpanes of nearby buildings shattered from the shock waves.

Officials inspect the site of explosion. —AFP
The injured were rushed to nearby Mayo Hospital, Services Hospital and Mian Munshi Hospital, where an emergency had been imposed. At least four injured were said to be in critical condition in Mayo Hospital.

Due to a power breakdown following the blast, hospital authorities faced problems in carrying out emergency operations.

The authorities have launched an investigation to determine how and when the truck arrived in the area.

Rai Ijaz, a senior police officer at the site, told reporters that the explosion had created a big crater where the truck was parked.


There have been several high-profile terrorism incidents in Punjab's capital city this year.

Last month, 26 people, including nine policemen, were killed and 58 others were injured in a bombing attack near the Arfa Karim IT Tower on Lahore's Ferozepur Road.

Another blast, targeting a census team in April, had resulted in the deaths of six people, including five forces personnel.

Similarly, a suicide blast on February 13 had ripped through a camp of protesting chemists in front of the Punjab Assembly, leaving 13 people dead and 70 others wounded.

This is a developing story that is being updated as the situation evolves. Initial reports in the media can sometimes be inaccurate. We will strive to ensure timeliness and accuracy by relying on credible sources such as concerned, qualified authorities and our staff reporters.