LAHORE: The postmortem report of an MPA’s domestic worker states repeated torture/trauma as cause of death, while police have inserted anti-terrorism clause in the first information report to avert reconciliation between the parties.

The medical officer after a three-day delay prepared the postmortem report of the domestic worker who was recovered dead from the house of PML-N MPA Shah Jahan.

The report available with Dawn revealed that the boy was repeatedly tortured with a blunt weapon and deep wounds found on the reproductive organ of the deceased could also have contributed to his death.

Akhtar Ali, 16, and his younger sister Atiya of Okara were employed as domestic workers at the house of the MPA for four years.

On Tuesday, Akhtar was sent to buy utensils by the MPA’s daughter Fauzia and when he got late allegedly beat him up with an iron rod and club. The victim suffered critical injuries on his body, which allegedly led to his death after three days.

Akbari Gate police had registered a murder case against the suspect Fauzia, who had got pre-arrest bail from the district and sessions court three days ago.

Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP) Investigation Mubashir Maiken told Dawn that the incident had generated fear in the area and that police were adding terrorism charges to the case. He said they also wanted to avert any settlement between the parties after inclusion of the terrorism charges.

The SSP said the postmortem report suggested the domestic worker had been tortured repeatedly and there were old and fresh wounds on his body. He said the suspect would appear before the investigation team today (Saturday) for interrogation. She had got pre-arrest bail and they would request the court and try to get it cancelled on the next hearing. They were also waiting for a complaint by the Child Protection & Welfare Bureau (CPWB) to insert clause of child labour to the case.

CPWB Chairperson Saba Sadiq and the SSP also addressed a joint press conference at her office.

Ms Sadiq claimed Fauzia tortured her domestic workers several times. She said they would provide every help, including legal and financial, to ensure justice to the bereaved family. She claimed they were also ready to bear the education, health and legal expenses of Atiya and rejected any pressure regarding provision of justice to the family.

The chairperson said she had visited the family in Okara and Atiya had narrated their ordeal at the employer’s house. The children were not allowed to go home for three years, she alleged.

Child rights activist Iftikhar Mubarak told Dawn he was surprised to know that MPA Shah Jahan, who is a member of the standing committee on labour and human resource in the assembly, employed children as domestic workers. How could she contribute to legislation for protection of rights of labour in such a case, he questioned.

