BAHAWALPUR/LAHORE: The Punjab government on the advice of Chief Minister Shahbaz Sharif has arranged allografts (donated tissues) from the US for skin grafting of critical patients who suffered burns in oil tanker tragedy belonging to Bahwalpur and Ahmedpur Sharqia areas.

Bahawalpur District Emergency Officer Dr Asif Rahim Channar of Rescue 1122 told Dawn on Monday that the allografts were expected to reach Lahore from Chicago, US, by Tuesday morning.

Allografts are skin, bone etc tissues donated by people who die in accidents or of sudden illness to be used in surgeries.

Dr Channar said the allografts were being transported from Chicago in cold chain boxes for the patients with critical burns admitted to the Jinnah Hospital, Lahore and Nishtar Hospital, Multan.

Earlier, on Sunday, three patients admitted to the BVH had gone under skin grafting. The surgeries were conducted by a team of doctors using allografts available with the hospital.

He said the allografts measuring about 0.1 million square centimeter have been donated by Chicago’s NGO -- Community Tissue Services -- for those injured in oil tanker inferno occurring near Ahmedpur East. Imran Gabol adds: Death toll rose to 207 when a man, injured in the oil tanker fire, expired at Jinnah Hospital on Monday.

As many as eight people with burn injuries were being treated at the Jinnah Hospital, 25 the Bahawalpur Victoria Hospital and 17 at the Nishter Hospital in Multan for treatment.

Jinnah Hospital Medical Superintendent Dr Sohail Saqlain told Dawn that of the 23 people brought to the hospital after the inferno tragedy, 14 had succumbed to their injuries in the last eight days.

He said they also had completed grafting of four patients and one of them, identified as Yousif, had been discharged while eight others were still being treated, adding that the grafting of four other patients had also been completed in Nishter Hospital, Multan.

He said the Jinnah hospital received critical patients who suffered more than 60 percent burn injuries and doctors were trying their best to save them.Jinnah Hospital burn unit head Dr Muzzam Tarrar highlighted the importance of organ donation, including skin, in the country. He told reporters that though donation laws existed in the country but people at large did not know about them and that “there is need to establish strong narrative regarding the organ donation”.

Up to 138 people were burnt alive and 117 injured when an oil tanker which skidded off the National Highway caught fire in Ahmedpur East on June 25.