LAHORE: The Punjab government has hired another team of Turkish experts to train traffic police in Lahore while the recommendations furnished by a previous Turkish team to improve traffic management system stand ignored.

Official sources say a four-member team had visited Lahore in February and held meetings with various government officials to discuss problems related to traffic management that are endemic in the province so as to suggest a solution. The experts had been given briefings by the Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning Agency (Tepa), chief traffic officer (CTO) and the Lahore Parking Company.

After deliberations, the Turkish experts in their report submitted to the government had recommended removal of all kinds of encroachments on and around the roads and footpaths in Lahore, which is the most affected city and where the government intends to start improvements from.
They recommended establishment of parking lots or plazas in parks, establishment of a Traffic Educational Theme Park to educate children about traffic rules and making traffic rules a part of syllabus from classes II to IX. They also suggested connecting 11 departments, including Tepa, traffic police, Parks and Horticulture Authority, education and transport, and establishing a central transport and traffic directorate and controlling all types of vehicles.
The sources claimed that the government ignored these recommendations of the previous Turkish team. While a new team arrived in the city to check progress on previous recommendations and devise a comprehensive plan to regulate traffic in the province.

The four-member delegation comprising Turkish traffic police officials headed by Abdur Rehman Evmez includes Naim Karatepe, Bekir Celen and Muslum Apaydin. It will have to stay in the city for three months to hold meetings with various government departments for devising a traffic management plan. The team will also suggest how to start E-Challaning under the Punjab Safe City Project.

CTO Rai Ijaz Ahmad on Wednesday held a meeting with the visiting team and discussed in detail traffic issues, challenges, available infrastructure and human resource. They finalised recommendations regarding new schemes to be introduced first in the provincial capital and replicated in other districts if successful.

Earlier, Chief Minister Shahbaz Sharif had approved funds worth Rs100 million for upgrading the traffic system and ordered Lahore Parking Company to install rotary parking system in the city. The system reduces the space required for parking cars. It uses an automatic method to pass cars from one level to the other. The rotary parking machines would be installed at a number of places in the city.

The CTO told Dawn they were working on the recommendation of the Turkish expert team.

“This team also is part of the government programme to get help from Turkish experts to manage traffic.”

He said the Lahore Parking Company was managing parking lots in the city and had installed four rotary machines at various spots and would purchase more to reduce parking space. He also said they were planning to ban slow-moving vehicles, including motorcycle-rickshaws, pushcarts and heavy transport.

The slow-moving vehicles would be banned on 20 model roads, including The Mall, Jail Road including Services Road, Walton Road, Maulana Shaukat Ali Road, Main Boulevard of Johar Town, Peco Road, Ferozepur Road (from Lytton Road to Gajjumata), Faisal Town Road, Model Town Link Road, Khayaban LDA Avenue Road, Allama Iqbal Road, Circular Road, GT Road, Shalimar Link Road, Canal Bank Road (from Jallo Park to Punjab University and from Jinnah Hospital to Thokar Niaz Baig), Madar-i-Milat Road and Ada Bediyan Road.

The CTO said: “We have also selected places in the city to introduce pelican/ pedestrian crossings.” These crossings are traditionally manually operated signals which allow pedestrians to cross the road. The Turkish expert team on Friday also held a meeting with Capital City Police Officer (CCPO) Amin Wains and discussed steps to improve traffic management in the city.

