The PPP on Thursday evening rubbished reports that the party had agreed to a two-year extension for military courts.

Earlier in the day, Finance Minister Ishaq Dar had told media after a meeting of parliamentarians in Islamabad that the PPP had "agreed" to a two-year extension for the parallel judicial system — a claim corroborated by Law Minister Zahid Hamid.

State-run broadcaster Radio Pakistan had also reported that political parties had agreed to extend military courts for a term of two years.

The PPP, however, slammed the reports and denied that any agreement had been reached on the legislative proposals prepared by the government to revive military courts.

"The PPP totally and roundly rejects any statement purportedly issued by any official agency creating a false and erroneous impression of the PPP having agreed to the draft proposals of the government," said a statement released by PPP Senator Farhatullah Babar.

The party had earlier pushed for a one-year extension and had also put forward nine recommendations of its own regarding the operations of military courts and how they should be handled moving forward.

In the second round of discussions on the issue, held today, the PPP had presented its demands but an agreement could be reached on only two of their nine points before the session concluded, Dar had said earlier.

PPP Central Information Secretary Chaudhry Manzoor, however, reiterated that the PPP had not let go of any of its proposals and will move its own amendments.

"These rumours have been spread by opponents of the PPP," he claimed.

After the meeting, the finance minister had also announced that a bill for constitutional amendments required for the re-instatement of military courts would be presented in the National Assembly on Friday, Radio Pakistan reported.

Dar said it had been decided that the government would present the Constitutional Amendment Bill and the Army Act Amendment Bill to the lower house, adding that all parliamentarians would have the right to bring their amendments to the house for debate and discussion.

The PPP's nine points include the recommendation that the provisions of the Qanoon-i-Shahadat, 1984 (Law of Evidence) apply to military courts and that the accused be granted the right to appeal.

Military courts had been disbanded on Jan 7 this year after a sunset clause included in the legal provisions under which the tribunals were established, expired.

The government and the opposition have since struggled to reach a consensus on reviving the courts despite frequent discussions.

The primary concern of critics is the mystery surrounding military court trials: no one knows who the convicts are, what charges have been brought against them, or what the accused's defence is against the allegations levelled.

Proponents say the courts act as an "effective deterrent" for those considering violent acts.

