LAHORE: A project aimed at upgrade of old and obsolete signaling system from Shahdara to Lodhran stations has become a source of vexation for Pakistan Railways (PR) authorities.

Railways’ failure to implement the automatic train protection (ATP), under the computer-based interlocking (CBI) system has caused many train collisions, resulting not only in loss of human lives but also substantial damage to railways assets, according to documents available with Dawn.

Only 20 percent work has so far been completed on the project launched in May 2010 and scheduled to be finished within three years at an estimated cost of Rs10.72 billion by a consortium of a German firm, Bombardier Transportation and China Railway Signal and Communication Corporation.

Ironically, the railways paid Rs12.5 billion to the consortium which could install inadequate computer-based Interlocking signal and Auto-Block System only at seven out of 31 stations from Shahdara to Lodhran so far.

The PR officers concerned managed to conceal the irregularities committed by the consortium till mid-2016 when the Federal Government Inspector of Railways (FGIR) expressed reservations with regard to making the seven stations operational where inadequate Interlocking Signal and Auto-Block System was installed.

However, a surge in train accidents drew attention of the railways authorities towards the FGIR reservations, audit paras and a complaint lodged with the railways ministry regarding ‘irregularities’ and ‘discrepancies’ in the project. The Railways Board chairperson, through a letter (No FD/B-I/Misc-1/2016) dated November 25, 2016 sought comments from the additional general manager (infrastructure) on “an anonymous application on massive corruption in re-signaling project of Pakistan Railways.”

The chairperson had asked the AGM to explain “what system was approved in the PC-1 and what system was agreed upon in the agreement? Whether the system delivered (one speed restriction i e 40km per hour) satisfactorily, meets the requirement of PC-1 and contract agreement? Whether the system meets the overall safety requirements of PR in the context of various speed restrictions? What are the implications of the speed restriction of 40km per hour?”

The deputy chief signal engineer, on behalf of the AGM, replied to the ministry secretary: “The system delivered one speed restriction ie 40 km per hour which is in the agreement and in the bidding documents. The system does not meet the overall safety requirement of the PR in the context of various speed restrictions.”

The ministry’s query that whether the design work of 10 out of 31 stations has been completed so far and that why the completion date for all of the stations has not been indicated, got the response: “The completion date of the design work in all respect for all the stations (will) be submitted after receiving the reply from consortium.”

About the “implications of opening stations without independent safety assessor report” and that “who was responsible for opening the stations without independent assessor report,” the chairperson was informed that a the consortium had been asked through a letter to provide the independent safety assessor report.

The chairperson also wanted to know who approved revision of Bill of Quantity (BoQ) and deletion and authorised deletion of track circuit material (impedance bond) and reconciliation of the amount (Rs930.9 million) reserved

for it without the approval of the competent authority. “The consortium has (been) asked to clarify the position regarding deletion of impedance bond and adjustment of amount,” was the reply.

The internal audit department observed that procurement of “incomplete and unsuitable ATP system reflected poor planning and slackness of railway administration; chances of connivance with the contractor cannot be ruled out. Consequently, the PR sustained substantial loss of Rs1551.20 million due to improper planning of railway administration.

