LAHORE: Coolies will have entitlement to paid leave in case of injury or sickness, have new uniform and rest rooms besides other facilities under a new system the Pakistan Railways administration is going to introduce initially at all major railway stations.

Coolies, however, have reservations about the new plan which the railways authorities say is ‘aimed at freeing them from the exploitation at the hands of contractors.

“A plan has been finalized to do away with the present ‘exploitative’ system under which coolies work,” said a senior officer of the Pakistan Railways at its headquarters in Lahore.

At present, coolies pay 27 per cent taxes on their income. “Coolies earn Rs20 million annually for the railways. After (implementation of) the new system, all the amount coolies will earn will be spent on their welfare,” said the officer.

Under the new arrangements, the divisional superintendent of railways would be responsible for the provision of two spacious rooms each having two or three attached washrooms at major railway stations in his jurisdiction.

One room would be a resting place while the other would be a common area, both having electricity connection, fans and water coolers as well. The common room would also have a TV set, indoor games, adequate benches and tables. Benches and shelter would also be provided for coolies at places where they wait for trains.

In order to ensure implementation of the new scheme, an agreement would be signed with the contractor who would be responsible for arranging coolies for two years, extendable for another year.

The contractor would make payment in case of injury or sickness to a coolie, having worked with him (the contractor) regularly for at least six months. A coolie would be entitled to 10 leaves with full wages (Rs500 per day) and eight leaves with half wages (Rs250 per day).

Provision of a new uniform -- shalwar, kameez and turban, with kameez having yellow strips and green and yellow turban, would be the responsibility of the contractor.

The per piece luggage carrying charges of coolies would also be revised under the new arrangements. “The rate of carrying a 40-kilo piece of luggage would be Rs50 per trip per piece.

Coolies would be assigned parcel duty – loading and unloading cargo in freight or cargo vans – on a rotation basis. The contractor would pay them at the rate of Rs20 per 40 kilo.

“Instead of getting fixed amount on monthly basis from the coolies, the contractor would get per trip charges with a ratio of 30:70 -- a contractor would get 30pc and the coolie 70pc of the amount paid by a passenger,” said the officer.

Cleanliness and maintenance of the rest and common rooms besides the attached washrooms would be the responsibility of the contractor who would also get the existing trolleys repaired.

To the satisfaction of railways administration and coolies, the contractor would arrange at least 20 large and as many small trolleys of silver grey colour having brake lock system in rear wheels and logo of Pakistan Railways.

Coolies say that carrying at least 40kg of luggage for merely Rs30 per single trip has been a backbreaking job involving occupational hazards like stress fractures and spinal cord injuries.

A coolie who introduced himself as Shah says a majority of his colleagues inherit the job either from their fathers or uncles. “A coolie carries at least 40kg of luggage for merely Rs30 per single trip at present. “It is a backbreaking job involving occupational hazards like stress fractures and spinal cord injuries,” he says.

Middle-aged Hussain is among the 40 or so coolies who handle luggage of Samjhota Express that operates between Wagah and Attari usually on Mondays and Thursdays.

“I was told by some Indian railways officials that in their country vacancies for coolies are announced in the media. After panel interviews the candidates and the selected ones are given licenses. Indian coolies are entitled to travel passes for themselves and spouses, medical facilities at outpatient wards of railway hospitals, free use of trolleys and access to shelters for rest,” he says.

Another coolie says the new plan was recently implemented in Karachi but it multiplied the agonies of his colleagues.

“Coolies in Karachi now wear green T-shirts and trousers but have less money in their pockets when they go to bed. The earlier system was less exploitative,” he says.

