PESHAWAR: The Khyber Pakhtunkhwa government’s plan to establish an adventure theme park in the reserved forests of Nathiagali hill station grew apprehensions of key stakeholders.

The Pakistan Air Force, forest department and local communities have expressed reservations about the project to be executed in the reserved forests in Galiyat area of Abbottabad district.

The project has already suffered setback as the tourism department failed to lure Chinese investors during the April road show in Beijing.

The relevant officials said the department was currently looking for local investors.

They said the government wanted to execute the theme park project on build, operate and transfer basis.

The scope of the project includes multiple activities common in an adventure theme park such as bungee jumping, tree-to-tree hopping, zip liners, high-rope course, climbing towers, tree-top walkway, bobsledding, rock climbing, luge, segway, twin drop, other eco-friendly activities, parking areas, emergency health unit and restaurant. The government expects to generate Rs126 million from the park annually.

Besides the park, the government has also planned the construction of five-star hotel in Changlagali over 25 acres of land.

The estimated cost of the project is around Rs2 billion. A piece of land, where youngsters from surrounding villages play games, has been selected for the hotel.

Galiyat is one of the most popular tourist attraction places in Khyber Pakhtunkhwa due to rich flora and fauna.

Nathiagali, located at 2,500 meters height from the sea level attracts hundreds of thousands of domestic tourists during the summer season. These forests have been notified as ‘reserved’ under the forest act.

Officials of the PAF and elders of local communities raised concerns about the project during a public hearing into the environmental impact assessment (EIA) report conducted by Environmental Protection Agency at Nathiagali in April.

The PAF has security concerns about it as the proposed park’s site lies along a non-flying base in Kalabagh area.

EPA director general Dr Mohammad Bashir confirmed security concerns of the PAF and said the tourism department had been asked to obtain the no objection certificate from the PAF.

The officials said the forest department raised legal objections about the park’s site.

The department despite the public notice did not send its representative to public hearing on the ground that the existing law did not allow any department or entity to carry on construction activities in reserved forests except forestation.

They said the provincial government would have to amend the law before allowing construction or any commercial activity except for plantation.

“There is no provision in the law to allow the construction or other activities in reserved forests until the government makes specific amendments,” said senior official of the forest department.

The official said the site, where the theme park would be constructed, belonged to the forest department.

He said the senior member of the Board of Revenue would first de-notify the site as a reserved forest and send a summary to the chief minister for relaxing the law to execute project in the reserved forests and later, the government would bring amendment to the law.

The contention of the tourism department is that the proposed site belongs to the Galiyat Development Authority and therefore, the objections of the forest department were irrelevant.

The site, the report said, was finalised after a detailed and thorough study and investigations and so, no other site could be taken as alternative.

Dr Bashir said the EPA had also directed the tourism department to produce the documents of the ownership of the land required for the park and hotel apart from the number of green trees to be cut down for the two projects.

However, the tourism department’s officials said not a single green tree would be chopped down for the project.

The environmentalists consider the growing commercial activities to be a potential threat to the natural beauty of Galiyat. The area has reserved pine forests and other species over 16,552 hectares of land that serve as a habitat for common leopard, monkeys and other wild animals.

“The beauty of Galiyat lies in wilderness and the mega projects will fade away natural beauty of the area,” said an official of the forest department in Abbottabad.

“We should learn lesson from Murree.”

Dr Mumtaz Malik, head of the department of forestry and wildlife management, University of Haripur, said any type of mechanised and construction activities would adversely affect the wildlife in the area.

“The theme parks and other activities will disturb wild animals,” he said suggesting that the government explore other ideas for the promotion of sustainable tourism in protected areas.

One of the irritants in the park project is concerns of the local communities, who raised their objections during a public hearing.

Jinda Khan, who represented local communities in the EIA hearing, told Dawn that the government should take cultural sensitivities of the local populations, especially the privacy of women into consideration before the executing the project.

He said the project would overburden sources of drinking water of three villages, including Lessan, Malach and Nagri Balla, and main thoroughfares that linked these three villages.

Another demand of the communities is jobs for local people.

The department expects around 500-700 people (skilled and unskilled) will be hired during the construction phase and around 400-500 persons (management and non management) during the operation phase.