PESHAWAR: The Jamiat Ulema-i-Islam-Fazl is set to generate huge revenue by reaping the benefits of its three-day international centenary congress (ijtima) scheduled to begin on Friday in Azakhel area of Nowshera district.

Organisers say the rough cost of the three-day events will range from Rs100 million to Rs160 million and that their cost is borne through charities and donations.

Around 1.6 million JUI-F members have donated Rs100 each for holding the congress. An aggressive campaign was run for the collection of donations from across the country. The event is organised to mark 100 years of the party.

The JUI-F insists four to five million people from Pakistan, Afghanistan, India, Bangladesh, Nepal and other countries will attend the event.
Foreign dignitaries, including Imam-i-Kaaba Sheikh Abdul Rahman Al-Sudais and Saudi religious affairs minister Saleh bin Abdul Aziz Al-Sheikh, will also attend the congress. Imam-i-Kaaba will lead Friday prayer on the first day of the congress.

The JUI-F has also invited ambassadors of 38 Islamic countries and European Union based in Islamabad.
JUI-F chief Maulana Rehman met the European Union ambassador in Islamabad on Monday and extended invitation for the moot.

The party leaders maintained mysterious silence when asked about those invited to the ijtima from Afghanistan.

JUI-F provincial spokesman Abdul Jalil Jan said President Mamnoon Hussain, Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif and governors of the four provinces had also accepted invitations.

“Imam-i-Kaaba will lead Friday prayer in Azakhel area,” he said.

Like other religious parties, the JUI-F has also organised the moot through donations.

The party has rented out all commercial activities, including food, supply of beverages etc. The Jamaat-i-Islami has also organized three-day moot at Azakhel last year and charged Rs 3,500 from each vendor.

The JUI-F spokesman said that total 770 makeshift stalls and 15 canteens had been set up at the venue to facilitate participants who would come from across the country. Around 10,000 kanals of land in Azakhel, where the event is being held, has been provided free of charge.

Three helipads and a parking lot to accommodate around 100,000 vehicles have been prepared, while a makeshift hospital and six dispensaries have been set up and 1,000 doctors would provide service to the participants.

Around Rs100 million will be generated through renting out of stalls, canteens and other commercial activities. The party has charged Rs6,000 for each stall and Rs150,000 for each canteen in advance. The contract for the beverage supply has also been awarded to a party. Every vendor and contractor was bound to sign an undertaking with the organisers.

According to the terms and conditions, vendor or contractor will have to produce an introductory letter of the general secretary or the district chief of the JUI-F.

In addition, the vendor or contractor will sell a particular item for which the permit has been issued to him otherwise the organising committee can terminate the contract anytime.

Abdul Jalil cited two main reasons for the renting out of commercial activities in Azakhel. He said the foremost reason for that was that it would create security problems if stalls were allotted free of charge.

The spokesman said second, the party had provided a tent covering 12/6 feet area to every vendor along with security, electricity and water for washing.

“The charging of Rs6,000 from each stall is a genuine rate,” he said, adding that canteens would sell food items at subsidised rate to the participants.

