KHAR: The authorities have directed the tribal people to expel immediately all Afghan and other non-local prayer leaders from mosques in Bajaur Agency and replace them with local clerics.

The step was taken on the instructions of Fata Secretariat, an official told Dawn. He said that removal of Afghan and other non-local prayer leaders from mosques in Bajaur would clear the region of suspected elements that could pose threat to law and order.

The official said that all the elders and members of peace committees across the agency were informed verbally by political tehsildars of their respective tehsils about the decision. He said that letters were also sent to most of the tribal elders in that regard. The official said that tribal elders were directed to expel all Afghan and those non-local clerics, who had no relatives in the areas where they were serving as prayers leaders, from their mosques.

“The elders have been directed to ensure removal of Afghan and other non-local prayers leaders from their mosques across the agency with immediate effect. They have also been advised to appoint only those local prayer leaders, who have good reputation and have no affiliation with any outlawed organisations, in their mosques,” said the official.

He said that the elders were asked to inform political tehsildar of the relevant tehsil about the action being taken for removal of Afghan and non-local prayers leaders in their areas.

However, the official did not say anything about the expulsion of ordinary Afghan refugees, living in different areas of the agency for the last three decades.

Meanwhile, Political Agent Mohammad Yahya Akhunzada has asked the elders of Mamond tribe to expedite their efforts for maintenance of peace in their area.

Talking to a delegation of elders and members of peace committees of Mamond tehisl here on Tuesday, he asked them to check activities of militants in the region.

The political agent said that militants were enemies of development and prosperity of the agency as they wanted to disturb peace in the region. He said that support of tribesmen was vital for restoration of durable peace in the region.

Speaking on the occasion, the elders of Mamond tribe said that they were united against militants and were capable of fighting them. They assured political agent of their support for peace. They said that they would extend their patrol to hilltops in border area to prevent cross-border militant attacks.