KHAR: A man was killed in a roadside bomb blast in the Mamond tehsil of the Bajaur tribal region on Thursday, local administration officials said.

The incident took place in the Inaam Khoaroo Chingai area, 11km northwest of Khar, the headquarters of the Bajaur tribal region.

Officials and eyewitness said that Shahzada Khan, a teacher, was going to Government Primary School Inaam Khoaroo Chinagi, when an explosive device placed on the roadside went off.

According to officials, the bomb was detonated by remote control. The schoolteacher was injured and died on way to the hospital.

Officials of the local administration and Levies personnel launched a search operation to trace attackers, but no arrest was reported till the filing of this report.

However, locals said that several people had been taken into custody under the collective territorial responsibility clause of the Frontier Crimes Regulation.

Local people and family members told Dawn that Shahzada Khan, 33, had no enmity with anyone and was popular in the village because of his efforts to create awareness about the importance of education.

Meanwhile, an official of the local administration told reporters that a committee would be set up to investigate the incident.

The incident follows a blast in which a volunteer of a peace committee in the Badan area of Mamond tehsil was wounded on Wednesday night.

Officials said that Imran Khan was going home from the nearby post when a roadside bomb exploded.

He was taken to the agency headquarters hospital in Khar but shifted to Peshawar because of his critical condition.

Besides, security forces claimed on Thursday to have foiled a sabotage attempt in Bajaur agency by recovering two bombs from the Inayat Kalley bypass road.

An official said that explosive devices planted along the road were recovered during a search operation which was carried out upon a tip-off.

Both devices were defused.

According to the official, two suspects were arrested during the search operation.