KHAR: The kidnapped son of former MNA and Pakistan People’s Party leader Syed Akhunzada Chattan was recovered here on Tuesday.

Officials said that Hussain Shah, son of Mr Chattan, who was kidnapped on Monday, was recovered safely. The kidnapped boy was found at Dosia graveyard in Khar.

The Levies personnel, who were on routine patrolling in the area, saw the kidnapped boy sitting near the graveyard. They immediately shifted him to political compound in Khar for identification, officials said.

They said that the boy was taken to his home amid strict security after the officials confirmed his identity.

Hussain Shah, 11, a student of sixth grade in Governor Model School Khar, was kidnapped by masked men on Monday when he along with his younger brother was waiting for the school bus outside his residence in Amankot area.

The kidnapped boy was found near Dosia graveyard in Khar
A joint search operation was launched by the local administration and security forces for safe recovery of the scion of former MNA.

According to official sources, scores of local people belonging to different areas of the region were arrested during the search operation on Monday night. The vehicle, used in kidnapping, was also recovered from the mountainous area of Utmankhel tehisl during the search operation.

A large number of people, PPP workers and officials of local administration and security forces rushed to the residence of former MNA soon after the recovery of his son.

Besides others, Political Agent Mohammad Yahya Akhunzada and Brig Ziaul Islam also visited the house of Mr Chattan.

Talking to journalists, the political agent said that the boy was recovered because of the joint efforts of the local administration and security forces. He said that administration made all out efforts and used all resources for the safe and early recovery of the boy.

“This is the result of our joint efforts and strategy that the kidnappers were forced to release the boy immediately,” said the official.

The former MNA also thanked the government, local administration and security forces for making efforts for the early recovery of his son. He said that he did not expect that his son would be recovered so quickly.